# 2018

December 23. Hudson River Trading Library, Floor 58, 4 World Trade Center.


2018 has been an eventful year. Leaving much to be pondered and appreciated.

### Three visits to Chicago, Paseo de la Reforma and Osiris

As we wandered by the snow-covered shores of Lake Michigan in January, I wouldn't have known two more trips to the same city await me just a few months away.
A much welcomed coincidence, as most have been.

Clouded by a sense of crisis and self doubts, there was a window of about a month that I said yes to every recruiter who reached out.
7 interviews were scheduled, 5 of which on-site.
And by the grace of Lady Fortuna, 5 offers ensued.
Some from companies that I haven't previously heard but gradually learnt to appreciate: IMC, Akuna in Chicago, and Zoox in the valley.
Others perhaps beyond my dreams, Google and Hudson River Trading.
In the latter of which I currently sit, overlooking downtown Manhattan on a starless Sunday night right before Christmas, and this time again in a different mindset.

I rarely thought myself a strong candidate, having less than 300 leetcode questions under my belt to start with.

It now seems laughable how I frantically checked my phone on the way back from Teotihuacan to Ciudad de Mexico, expecting the decisive call from Google.
Pacing restlessly up and down Paseo de la Reforma looking for a quiet spot to pick up the call, and desparately trying to take in all the details of feedbacks knowing that I have made the cut, became fond memories of the trip, along with the foolhardy effort of pointing at the stormy skies to capture the weapon of Zeus, and enjoying a hearty meal under the calm morning sun on the following day.

Two weeks later I cleared an entire day of interviews in World Trade Center.
In Room Osiris overlooking the Statue of Liberty, where in between the rounds I had the leisure of taking in panoramic views of the Hudson River glittering in dazzling summer sun.
Why they named the room after the Egyptian deity was beyond me, but what a fitting name nonetheless: him of rebirth, and of Nile inundation thus of life and harvest.

Arguably I find	it hard to judge if I'm worthy of the harvest thus sown.
Prudence often advised against judging, especially when not knowing the complete picture or being able to perfectly assess the variance in the minute details.
Worthy or not, I am grateful for everything I was gifted with, and see myself willing to commit my passion and efforts into what is deemed right.

May our path stays guided by prudence, and such willingness last.

### 2.2%

Vain and jealous as it may sound, the 2.2% was my last straw, if I'm to be completely honest with myself.

### The choice, and the mortal fear

