July 28, 2019
Hudson River Trading Library, Floor 58, 4 World Trade Center


This week saw three core developers leaving the company, due to performance reasons.
I do not know the detailed circumstances of each, yet it always seems demoralizing to see folks being asked to leave, be it a recent hire of two seasons or a seasoned hand of several years.
Back at school or in my year-and-half at Bloomberg the thought of being forced onto something seemed so distinct that only now has it begun to dawn on me what that means for someone international, and perhaps worse, for someone who has not experienced a serious downturn.

This gets me pondering about my own work. If nothing else, being the latest member on a large team with degrading performance is worrying, especially when my work is more individual and replaceable.

What is really the role of an engineer? What are our core values?
What are the tradeoffs?
Which is the critical path from here, for myself, my work, and the team and the company?

Engineers are problem solvers first and foremost.

### What problem to solve

Prioritize the one blocking the critical path.

One can bitch about code style violations, poor integration testing, non-existent continuous integration all day, but is that the weakest link?
Spotless code that does the wrong thing is still worse than a piece of crap which gets the job done.
When we complain about such, perchance it is the one thing we are good at, not the weakest link in our chain.
In other words, we are twisting the problem to fit our strength, not adapting to solve the problem.

Similarly, one can boast skills in distributed system, machine learning, software architecture or simply writing good code, but if they do not get you any closer to a solution, what use is there of your training in such, say, profound art of dragon-slaying?

Hence we should first realize the problem on the critical path, the one that blocks progress.

Whose critical path? Unfortunately in my line of work at its current stage, that of my employer's.
I am paid as an individual contributor to make the company's problems go away.
Great if they line up with my interest and priorities, if not, in the long run we should reconcile the two: either leave for something different, or bend either towards a blend of both's.
A mismatch here would be a common cause for stagnation in one's growth.

The reality in locating the weakest link, however, is often times murky, as what one faces is always unique.
A true visionary may know the problem better than the client he serves, with tact and resolve he would guide others into his view.
Yet being too stubborn in his pursuit he could become trapped in fixing any problem on a solution he knows well.

To navigate such ground the most useful seems to be to observe, communicate and reflect. Gather the facts, apply our expertise, and make a judgment call.

Outside work the same would apply, only that we ourselves would be in control of the critical path: what do we want to pursue, where do we want to improve, and why?

### The balancing act

The solution almost always is a compromise, a tradeoff between multiple aspects, or conflicting goals.
It is so between time vs space in an algorithm, bias vs variance in statistics, and noise reduction vs details when post processing a photo.
As is with most choices, a small company vs a big one, moving fast vs architecting something well, having an abstraction that covers all vs individual solutions tailored to each.
Or personal traits: being cautious or daring, lenient or aggressive, reaching out for help or diving deep oneself.

Know the problem, know your tradeoff, make a judgment call and know what you are sacrificing.
Know that the problem and our experience both evolve.
Evaluate your situation and reflect, know when to dive deep and exploit, also when to take a step back, go wide and explore.

### Values

In finding the right balance we saw common traits shared by good problem solvers.

* Face your worst fears.
* Seek and embrance change. Try. Take risks.
* No excuses. Persistence.
* Take a break. Daily, quarterly, yearly. Clear your mind.
* Appreciate the problem, appreciate others. Learn and grow.

HRT has a large pool of talented folks.
It is perhaps time to acknowledge no matter how hard I try, I will not be as good as someone else at things I care about.
Yet someone better in strategy may be worse in tactics, another better in both may be worse in execution.
Find the right blend for yourself, and the ground for you to shine.

### Ebb and flow

No matter how hard we try, we fall into ruts.
Know where we have come from, to gauge where we want to be.

Looking back, the flows include
* first year of undergrad, when we did well in school and spent the summer in memorable activities
* summer of 2013 in the US and the following year at remap, during which we dived hard to understand NDN
* from the 2nd quarter at grad school till the first half year at Bloomberg, when we established good rituals and laid the foundation for the next steps
* the last quarter at Bloomberg till the first quarter at HRT when we saw our skills sharpened, acompanied by good fortunes in seeking a change.

The ebbs followed each flow, where
* sophomore and junior year during which we saw excessive amount of time spent on games
* subsequent years at remap when learning slowed down to a slog and our vision of future became clouded
* after first performance evaluation at Bloomberg, when our effort seemed misguided and the growth aspect seemed hindered
* after the initial thrill at HRT expires, when job security started to become a concern. Disatisfaction and lack of confidence in our skills started to rise

Some among pessimism, jealousy, cynicism, procrastination and a disinterest in everything typically accompany an ebb, whereas confidence, creativity and a stream of projects and hobbies usually come with each flow.
Inspecting our recent predominant mindset gives a good clue of the state we are in.

Understand it's part of the natural cycle, but seek to overcome it.
Reflect on the problems, our approach and tradeoffs, adhere to our guiding values. Appreciate, learn and grow.

Wake up with one problem we want to work on, one ritual we want to strengthen today. Go to bed satisfied, knowing we've made good progress.
